Previously on
Criminal Minds: Evolution...
Brian Garrity is
a tinfoil hat-wearing truther.
GARRITY:
FBI fabricated a manhunt to cover up
the assassination of
Deputy Director Douglas Bailey.
Do you have any idea
how many rabbit holes
Brian Garrity has been down
in his life?
The moon landing.
the Kennedy assassination.
LEWIS: Guards say you're talking
to yourself.
Anything I should know about?
Go ahead. She'll believe you.
Your subconscious
is fighting urges to kill.
which is why
I'm distracting you.
You talking to me
is how you cope.
The families of some
of your victims have reached out
and they want to meet you.
Most are looking
for an accountability
that doesn't always come
with a conviction.
VOIT:
You think
if I walk you
through everything.
you'll be able
to stop someone else?
LEWIS:
For the sake of others.
I can't just let you sit
in here and not tell your story.
VOIT:
Problem is. while we sit in here
talking about it. someone new
is out there doing it.
You just don't know it yet.
Open up. Police.
- What's his name again?
- Al Smith.
Mr. Smith? Metro PD.
- You're sure he's home?
- Think so.
I saw him three days ago.
He's off.
I-I need more than "he's off."
He's not picking up his mail.
He's not answering his phone.
Other day. he couldn't even
unlock his door.
He's off.
(keys jingle)
Mr. Smith?
- Anybody home?
- (soft hissing)
We're entering
to do a wellness check.
Sir? Are you all r...
(sniffs)
Hold up.
Is that a gas leak?
Our ranges are ancient.
- Oh. no. did he suffocate?
- Shh. shh. shh.
(sharp scratching in distance)
Whoa. whoa. whoa.
whoa. whoa. whoa. whoa.
Hey. stop.
Whoa. stop. Stop.
What the fuck are you doing?
Hey. what the fuck
are you doing? Stop.
- You don't need to do this.
- Al.
- no.
- Y-You don't need to do this.
- BILL: Stop.
- KILPATRICK: No!
♪ ♪
♪
I'm sorry.
(phone vibrates)
(phone clicks)
GARCIA:
Harlan Ellison wrote
"I have no mouth.
and I must scream."
(alarm ringing)
Fuck!
(grunts)
(ragged exhale)
Fuck.
Get it together.
(alarm stops)
(elevator bell dings)
- Where is he?
- He's right there.
All right. Hey.
- Thank you.
- Oh. but of course.
- What happened to your hand?
- It's nothing. I'm okay.
Holy shit!
They will let anybody
up on the sixth floor now. huh?
Well. they let your dumb ass
become a profiler. didn't they?
- How have you been. Tom?
- Good.
- Yeah?
- Good. You?
Well. you know...
Uh. listen. I-I. uh.
I heard about...
- Yeah. Um...
- I know. bud.
I'm sorry.
Seriously. what. uh.
what are you doing up here?
Well. I'm here to see you.
And. hopefully. your team.
- Is it bad?
- It's weird.
Come on.
Came to the right place.
Let's go.
(chuckles)
- Hey. SSA Prentiss.
- Hi.
- Agent Tyler Green.
- Good to see you again. sir.
Oh. you've worked
with Agent Green before?
Well. I helped Green get through
his Basic Field Training Course.
Well. he didn't help
so much as I survived.
Agent Milliken kicked my ass.
Me and all the new
agent trainees.
PRENTISS:
Is that how you met Luke?
Oh. no. Alvez and I
are retired army grunts.
We met in the ARC Program.
The Army Recovery Care Program.
- They do great work.
- MILLIKEN: We do.
I'm proud to get
to volunteer there.
We help ill and injured
service members
reintegrate into civilian life.
Matter of fact. that's why
I'm knocking at your door.
The BAU does equivocal
death investigations. correct?
Helping determine
the manner of death.
whether it's suicide.
homicide. or...
just an accident?
That is correct.
Do you have a case like that?
Well...
Luke. could you...
This is Captain Al Smith.
another friend of mine from ARC.
He died yesterday morning.
Cause of death?
Gas stove blew up in his face.
All four ranges
were turned all the way up.
Based on the explosion.
they'd been that way
for quite some time.
Had the. uh. matchbook
in his hand.
We can take the case.
We'd start with
a psychological autopsy.
but I-I just don't think
there's much for us
- to investigate here.
- MILLIKEN: I know. I know.
And I know the numbers.
Hell. I preach 'em.
87% of all vets report exposure
to at least one traumatic event.
and less than half get
the treatment that they need.
But that is not Al. okay?
If you met him through ARC.
what-what was he
being treated for?
Anxiety. Depression.
Intrusive thoughts.
Which are indicators of PTSD.
His pistol was in his gun safe.
I mean. he didn't blow his
brains out. he blew himself up.
And he took a cop
and a building superintendent
with him.
That's odd. even for PTSD.
Did you know him. Luke?
I know the type.
And I know what scares me is...
Let's say this is
what it looks like.
Sometimes.
it happens in clusters.
One of our guys
punches his own ticket
and another one says.
"Hey. that's a good idea."
"Maybe I'll go out
the same way."
That's why I want to take it.
Find out why.
- Tyler. would you mind?
- Not at all.
Agent Prentiss. thank you.
- Good morning.
- Ugh.
Ah. you got my email.
What the hell is Voit up to?
Tara is with him now.
so is Rebecca to expedite.
All he has to do
is pick a family member
and say. "Boo-hoo. I did it."
Just one family member.
And he is down
to his final four.
He's treating this like he's
picking out a goddamn ring.
He is trying to find
the victim he killed
with the least amount
of violence
because that will be
the least upsetting
to whomever he talks to.
Yeah. well.
someone should tell him
it's always upsetting.
PRENTISS:
Hey. Morning.
- Woof.
- Oh. You too?
How many podcasts
do you listen to?
Um. I don't know.
It's mostly news. Why?
Well. Henry devours them.
Specifically. the ones on Voit.
and it turns out
that there's one
that mentions
me. you and the BAU.
It's our case.
- It goes with the territory
we'd be mentioned. - No.
Emily.
This one is made
by someone you know.
Personally.
Fu...
(elevator bell dings)
Emily. Bella!
- Come on.
- Oh. Oh. dear. I get it.
I've made your job harder.
haven't I?
But. Emily. come on.
the brass ring is right there.
All this time. I've been
barking up the wrong tree.
I thought conspiracies
were where it's at.
Serial killers.
Serial killers!
My downloads
are through the roof.
and it's not just
about the money.
The money is very nice.
It's about the social capital.
Emily. I'm trending.
I've never trended before.
I've never
had a hashtag catch on
with more than three people
and now I'm trending.
And yes. of course.
I may have taken
one or two little liberties
in the service
of a greater story...
Are you going to kill me?
No. because that's illegal.
And you have every right
to produce a podcast
that is nothing but lies.
Excuse me. not nothing.
Did or did not Elias Voit
call you dad?
Because I paid an orderly
a hefty sum for that intel.
Which. when he said it.
was more like.
uh. "Is that you. Dad?"
And less like
I had it on the pod.
which was more. um.
"Ooh. spank me. Daddy."
PRENTISS:
Even that is not why you're here.
You're here because
you're claiming
Voit is a serial killer
that was trained
by the BAU to be
a Manchurian candidate.
which is-is...
- uh... uh...
- ROSSI: It's horseshit.
And you're gonna clean up
the mess you've made.
I can do that.
I can do that. no problem.
I-I'm wrapping up season one.
I-I can put a cap
on the season finale.
uh. and do a 180-degree pivot.
That's what we do on podcasts.
You start out with one thesis.
and then. eventually.
you pivot to another one. right?
To sell it. though.
I just need one
little thing.
What?
What no other
Elias Voit podcast has.
I want
an on-the-record interview
with the white whale himself.
- You can't possibly...
- GARRITY: Oh. come on.
I mean "white whale"
metaphorically.
I'm not fat-shaming the guy.
Although. I did hear
he's putting on LBs in prison.
- Confirm? Deny?
- No.
Okay. good for him.
Keeping the weight off.
No to your request.
That's not happening.
Oh... That's really a shame.
I feel bad for you guys.
'Cause I guess I'll just
have to keep telling my story
my way.
Get out.
GARRITY:
Oh.
Tell Tara I said hi.
(sighs)
OFFICER: Transfer van is here.
Please have
all transfer prisoners
to the garage and ready.
I think this one.
Oh. wait. no. sorry.
No...
This one. Yeah.
- Deena Ryan.
- VOIT: Mm-hmm.
You're sure?
Yeah.
- Yeah. I'm sure.
- LEWIS: Okay.
Why her?
(sighs) What does it matter?
It matters because it matters.
Before her mom comes in here.
we need to confirm that
you're telling the whole truth
- about her daughter.
- Look. I strangled Deena.
She died.
That's the whole truth.
That is not good enough. Elias.
Her mother's gonna
want to know why.
Why you took her daughter.
where you took her.
- how you strangled her.
- Wait.
Wait. you both
wearing wedding rings.
Oh. my God. you got married.
That-That's amazing.
Congrats.
Focus. please.
Yeah. sorry. Um...
Look. I-I just hope
it works out.
- (scoffs)
- VOIT: I mean. not "I hope."
I... It's gonna work out.
It's gonna be great.
I just. I-I think. you know.
especially everything
we're going through right now.
getting married
is kind of the ultimate act
- of optimism. so...
- Hey. Hey. Hey. hey. hey.
- VOIT: What?
- We know you're getting divorced.
but we've got a job to do.
Right. Uh... Sure. All right.
(sighs) Tell you what.
I'll coordinate
with the Bureau of Prisons.
We'll get Deena's mom
put on your visitor list.
Great.
And I will review Deena's file.
Just...
be honest with the mom. okay?
- (buzzer sounds)
- (door opens)
ROSSI:
Nice job.
Dodging that question.
not telling them what you
really did to that girl.
I really don't want
to tell them anything.
Then why are you doing this?
You told me to.
What good is having an angel
on my shoulder
if I don't listen to him?
(gasps)
Oh. that's adorable.
What is?
You think I'm the angel.
Do you want me to. uh...
Get started without me.
I'll catch up.
(door opens)
(door closes)
How are you doing?
Tired.
I heard that.
I'm SSA Luke Alvez
with the Bureau.
I'm looking into
Captain Smith's death.
Oh. Nice to meet you.
If. uh. if you're here.
I guess that means. uh...
Yeah.
He didn't have a family.
I've got to get him dressed
and take him up to Arlington.
- Can I have a look?
- Yeah.
Don't take it out of the bag.
Smith was EOD?
Pardon?
Captain Smith was
Explosives Ordinance Disposal.
Um. I guess. Is that important?
It might be.
- Can I ask you something?
- Sure.
The way he died.
is there gonna be enough
for his dress blues?
I don't know.
(sighs)
Okay. so cause of death
was trauma from the explosion.
If that didn't do it. the
fourth degree burns would have.
- Was it instantaneous?
- Yeah.
The cop and the super
weren't so lucky.
I know it might sound weird.
but was his brain still intact?
You thinking PTSD?
I'm thinking it. yeah.
Well. there's
definitely evidence
of a traumatic brain injury
as a result of. you know.
a small rocket exploding
in Captain Smith's face.
but when you're talking PTSD.
the biggest giveaway.
post-mortem.
is reduced hippocampal volume.
and his was perfectly-sized.
So his brain was normal?
Mm. I didn't say that.
I saw something weird
on the CT scan at first.
It was so nuts.
I performed an MRI to be sure.
That is highly abnormal.
GREEN:
And it's not from the explosion?
Mm-mmm.
Too symmetrical.
So. what would cause that?
Not what. Who.
MILLIKEN: I'm sorry. I don't understand
what I'm looking at here.
GREEN:
Those gashes between the lobes
are evidence of an ice pick.
shoved up each nostril
into his brain.
Captain Smith was lobotomized.
Wait. what?
Why?
We don't know.
He... he-he would never...
We thought the same thing
until we did some more digging.
and it turns out that
this isn't the first time
it's happened.
GREEN:
This is Major Howard Newton.
Last week. he disappeared.
When police found him.
he'd also been lobotomized.
You recognize him?
No. Should I?
He was an advocate for
Arlington Army Recovery Care.
Look. Tom.
you thought this was
about more than suicide.
and you were right.
This doesn't make any sense.
All the ARC Program does
is help injured soldiers.
Why would somebody
do this to us?
ALVEZ:
(sighs) Because he's hurt.
and he wants them
to feel his pain.
You don't have to do this.
I-I can help you.
I can make you feel better.
I swear.
No. no. no. no.
What are you gonna do?
This is better
if you don't move.
Just-just give me
one more chance.
I promise.
it-it'll work this time.
Please.
No.
Y-Your daughter was very. um...
I'm sorry. I know that's...
That's-that's what
I want to say. is I'm sorry.
A-Are you-are you comfortable?
Do you need anything?
Maybe like...
water or. I don't...
No.
Want to take a swing at me?
I'm not gonna fight back.
You could probably get
a few in before anyone
runs in here and...
That's not gonna happen.
I don't want that either.
Okay. W-W-What do you want?
It... I'm Sorry. I mean...
W-What do you want from me?
I want to tell you
what I've learned.
Because when your child dies.
you learn.
Everything.
You seek out every detail
you can find
to make it make sense.
So. I've learned
how much pressure it takes
to crush a larynx.
14.3 kilograms.
Did you know that?
I did.
Of course you did.
'Cause you learned it. too.
It was part of your training.
- What?
- RYAN: Your training
by this government agency.
The very same agency.
coincidentally. that caught you.
Because you went off
the reservation. didn't you?
LEWIS:
Ms. Ryan. that's completely unfounded.
VOIT:
Wait. what is she talking...
I'm sor... I don't know. What
di... Where did you hear that?
- Don't tell me you don't know.
- I...
You know.
The whole world knows.
- It's in the podcast.
- What podcast?
What podcast?
Look. calm down.
There are a lot
of podcasts out there
telling bigger lies about you.
This is how the algorithm works.
I'm sure Brian Garrity's bad.
but he's not even
the worst one out there.
Yeah. but he is
the most popular. right?
Given your
prior experience with him.
the most believable.
thus the more dangerous.
Dangerous?
Jesus. stop already.
Just tell me how I'm wrong.
Look. give a dipshit
a megaphone.
he's still too stupid
to use it properly.
Just let the guy have his
15 minutes and he'll go away.
What if my daughters hear it?
LEWIS: Elias. your daughters
already know everything.
A podcast is not gonna
change their minds.
Okay. well. what if
it changes someone else's?
You know. someone could find
this. they could-they could
interpret it wrong.
they might identify with me.
they might idolize me.
You didn't control
a network of people
who would do anything
that you told them to do.
No. But we arrested
all of them. remember?
The guy we're talking about
is a troll.
What is the first thing
that we learned
about the Internet?
You don't feed the trolls.
No. that was the first lesson
of the Internet
before the troglodytes
took over.
I want-I want... I want
to set the record straight.
How?
- By going on his podcast.
- No.
How am I supposed
to give anyone closure
when everyone who comes in here
is believing these lies
that this Garrity clown
is telling them?
Look. I'll keep doing this.
but how am I supposed
to keep doing this
and subjugating myself
to people if...
if-if... if they don't even
believe what I'm saying?
I want to at least apologize
for what I actually did.
All right. Let's-let's
think this thing through.
You go on the record
with Garrity. what happens?
You get more attention.
You give him more attention.
You're only gonna
make the guy more popular.
Yes. and that is why
you are going to
give him a list of conditions.
Of course you have conditions.
So I'm supposed to make
a podcast happen from prison?
It's-it's not a livestream.
it's a pre-tape.
FBI and DOJ have complete
control over the recording.
Anything goes sideways.
we seize the audio.
A-And what are these conditions
Voit's demanding?
A backup recording.
provided by us.
nothing high-tech.
It can literally be. like.
a voice memo on your phone.
- Why?
- Insurance.
Voit wants to make sure
Brian doesn't edit him
out of context
or misrepresent him.
And if he does.
Voit has the right to release
the unedited audio
to a rival podcast.
(laughs) And we're just
fine with all this?
W... Am I happy to let
a psychopath match wits
with a deranged narcissist?
No. I'm not. but if it
gets rid of Garrity.
I'm willing to roll the dice
on a psychopath.
Wait. I thought
you profiled that Voit
- was no longer a psychopath.
- No. you're right.
He's not. It's... (sighs)
When Brian Garrity
is in my life. it...
Have you ever had heartburn?
Where-where the...
acid reflux is so. so hot.
it's like you can
taste the hatred?
Okay. the guards
are gonna have to inspect
- all the audio equipment.
- Oh. absolutely.
REBECCA:
Okay. and no touching. None.
Of course.
Will Garrity say yes?
He already did.
He had his own
counter-conditions.
Ok... Okay. now I'm feeling it.
(sighs) Come on.
The prescription antacids
are in my office.
Oof.
What do we got?
Two victims.
Part of a program
to help veterans recover
physically and mentally.
Unsub's targeting them.
but not killing them.
Well. then what is he...
Oh. shit. Lobotomy.
Never mind.
Victimology's connected through
the Army Recovery Care Program.
So. he could have been
a part of it
or rejected from it.
and now he's taking revenge.
Uh. lucky for us. the U.S. Army
does keep meticulous records.
(gasps) Tyler.
could you do me a solid?
Vouch for me
with Agent Milliken.
'cause then maybe
I can get into ARC's files?
Men in uniform either
throw themselves at me
or throw me out of their office.
- Is everything okay with Luke?
- JJ: Uh...
- Yeah. I think-think so. Why?
- GREEN: I don't know.
Maybe it's nothing.
He just seems a bit... You know?
See. that is why I always
consult the Oracle of Alvez.
Penelope. is Luke okay?
I don't know.
I don't know. And if
I did know.
I wouldn't tell any of you
because I'm not a gossip.
So. let's get back to work.
Skedaddle.
DOCTOR: It's not the outcome
any of us wanted. but
the tumor's spread.
There's nothing else we can do.
What are my. uh...
What can I do?
Well. we have a choice.
If you want.
I can discharge her.
or we can keep her here.
keep her comfortable.
How much time does she have?
Luke. she's in a lot of pain.
GARCIA:
Hey.
Where's your head?
This case...
They're starting to notice.
Okay. uh...
I'll get it together.
Oh. and one more thing?
Uh. Howard Newton...
the first lobotomy victim...
his wife brought him in.
All right.
Are you up for this?
I have to be.
KIM:
This was... let me think...
about nine days ago now.
I can't even
make sense of it. really.
He called me to tell me
he was coming home. but then...
he never came home.
And when did you
call the police?
Midnight. that night.
And when did they
find your husband?
They didn't. I did.
When the sun came up
and he was still gone.
I started to just go crazy.
so I got in my car
and I drove around.
I found him
two blocks from our house.
So whoever did this
knew where you lived.
I suppose.
Or maybe they let Howard go.
and he recognized
- a few streets.
- (grunting. stammering)
- Hey. Hey. hey. hey. Shh.
- K-K-K...
- Hey. hey. I'm here. I'm here. honey.
- K...
Shh. Hey. Shh.
Shh. Shh. I'm here.
That's all he can say
of my first name.
Kimberly.
Uh. Ms. Newton. we're...
(clears throat)
we're trying to make a map
of where this man's
finding his victims and
where he might be leaving them.
Do you think
you could help us out?
I can try.
I-I don't know how much
I'm gonna be able
to give you. though.
Okay. no. we-we appreciate that.
- Uh. Luke. can you...
- Yeah. Sure.
I'll keep Major Newton company.
(door opens)
- (door closes)
- HOWARD: K...
No. y-your wife.
she'll-she'll be right back.
She's just in the other.
the other room.
- K...
- Do you-you need something?
K...
No. no. no. no.
- No. No.
- (crying)
Kill me.
No. man. Hey.
- Kill me.
- No. man. just hang on.
- Okay?
- Kill me. kill me.
Just hang on.
It's all right.
GREEN:
This victim's name
is Theodore Nguyen.
Lobotomized. catatonic.
like the others.
He was found outside
his own office. No cameras.
- Where was this?
- GREEN: Baltimore.
There's no ARC Program
in Baltimore.
That would track
because Mr. Nguyen
isn't associated
with the military at all.
He's an acupuncturist.
Acupuncturist?
JJ:
Yeah. Surprised us. too.
This guy is way outside
of this unsub's victimology.
Is there any overlap
between acupuncture and ARC?
No. none.
We don't offer that
as part of our services.
ALVEZ:
Acupuncturists treat pain. right?
What did Nguyen specialize in?
He advertised clinical therapies
for headaches.
What kind of headaches...
migraines?
Yeah. In fact.
he promoted
his unique therapy for it.
If the unsub
is suffering from that.
it could be motivating him.
You don't lobotomize somebody
for headaches.
You might if the pain
was bad enough.
(tires screech)
What are-what are they called...
the ones that your friend
- suffered from?
- Cluster headaches.
They're so intense
that they can cause
temporary vision changes. auras.
ALVEZ: They can lead to anxiety
and aggression.
The pain is so bad
that some patients
call them "suicide headaches."
Let's just say this unsub
suffered an injury in-country.
uh. developed PTSD.
First. he would try
to manage it himself.
- push it down.
- JJ: He'd push himself
to the limit.
He's a soldier. A warrior.
Yeah. When that didn't work.
he would self-flagellate.
As in cut himself
or whip himself?
No. Tattoos.
This guy has full sleeves.
both arms.
Probably his whole body.
They would be a marker
of the pain that
he's trying to outrun.
And once he can't
take it anymore. he comes to ARC
for some sort of relief.
he doesn't get it.
so he attacks the other vets
he comes in contact with
for not helping.
Yeah. except Ms. Garcia and I
checked with ARC.
Volunteer activity
is regularly documented.
And there's no overlap
between our two victims
and any one particular patient.
Yeah. but if he wasn't
evaluated correctly.
there would be no record. right?
Yeah.
Yeah. Yeah. that's right.
Then we need to talk to
whoever the acupuncturist saw.
He's the outlier
in terms of victimology.
We'll build a suspect list
out of any veterans he treated.
Okay. well.
we need to move quick.
It's only a matter of time
before he gets another headache.
Hey. explain something to me.
If they're called
"suicide headaches."
why is this soldier
going on the offense?
Because when
you're a psychopath.
right before you kill someone.
your brain gets flooded
with dopamine.
That would be the only chemical
that would give him some relief.
But he's not killing them.
No. because then
their pain would be over.
He wants them
to feel like he does.
Locked in.
GUARD (over P.A.):
Transport gate open.
GARRITY:
Test one.
test one.
shibboleth. shibboleth.
Sure you're good with this?
Test two. test two.
red leather. yellow leather.
red leather.
(sighs) For the record.
this is a secondary recording
of the Elias Voit
and Brian Garrity interview.
Mr. Garrity. do you consent
to this recording?
I do.
All right.
Let's bring him in.
Oh. wait.
Okay. Now I'm ready.
(laughs) I'm gonna make
BetterHelp my bitch after this.
- (buzzer sounds)
- (door opens)
(indistinct chatter in distance)
(clears throat)
(door closes)
(laughs):
Wow. I mean...
You are so... short.
I'm sorry. I-I just mean
I. you know. I was expecting...
Save it for the episode.
Okay.
(sighs)
Welcome to The Sicarius Files.
colon. Elias Voit. colon.
Man or Mystery.
I am your host. Brian Garrity.
Today's episode. truly amazing.
My guest.
the Sicarius killer himself.
Elias Voit.
Hello.
- (clears throat)
- To set the scene
for our listeners.
we are currently...
No. you can't say where he is.
Sorry. Right. Okay.
We are currently in prison.
So. Elias.
May I call you Elias?
VOIT:
What is this?
Hmm? What is this?
Hmm?
- (sharp ringing)
- Wh... Hey. please don't do that.
It-it-it puts the levels
in the red.
Oh. your le...
Your levels are in the red?
I'm sorry.
you're spreading lies about me
and you're worried about
your fucking levels?
Whoa!
(gasps)
Oh. whoa.
Ok-Okay. I'm-I'm turning
this off right now.
VOIT:
No.
You got yourself into this.
little man.
There's no escaping now.
What's... Are you gonna...
This was the deal.
We didn't approve the sign.
Wh...
(clears throat)
Look at me. Brian.
Just look at me.
Why are you telling
your listeners
that I was trained
by the government?
- Uh...
- I'll tell you why.
It's because it gives you
an explanation for me.
It makes me seem smaller.
Do I seem small to you
right now?
No.
- I'm sorry. what?
- No.
No.
Good. And your podcast...
how-how much of it
is actually true?
- None of it.
- None of it?
Good.
Good. very good.
Now it's-it's my turn
to explain myself to you.
And you're not-you're not...
far off.
Takes a little man
to be scared of someone
banging on a table. but it...
takes a littler one
to resort to it.
There's...
nothing romantic about me.
I'm not brilliant.
I'm not special.
I'm an antisocial psychopath
who can only get his heart rate
up by killing people.
It's sad how pathetic I am.
but you know
who's even more pathetic?
Someone who makes a show
about it.
And anyone who listens to it.
Now we're done.
(door opens)
(door closes)
(exhales)
You knew that was gonna happen.
You knew Voit was gonna do that.
No. we told him
no physical contact.
but yeah. I-I had a feeling
he would have something
- up his sleeve.
- Mm-hmm.
- (exhales)
- Hey. take it easy.
I have to salvage the remains
of my flaming career.
You betrayed me.
I thought we were friends.
Oh. Brian. there's something
I've been wanting to say
for the better part
of six years.
We are not friends.
All you have ever done
is make my life miserable.
so my job is not
to make your job easier.
Well. how dare you?
You are a public servant.
To the public!
Not to you. personally.
Oh. you have me siding
with a convicted serial killer
over you.
I don't know what I'm gonna do.
When my audience
hears this episode.
they're gonna be furious
at Voit's disdain for them.
You don't...
have to post it.
I already presold
the advertising
to a vegan-only
meal kit delivery service.
And if there's one group
you don't want to cross.
it's Big Vegan.
Okay. so. so.
what if you reframed it?
I mean. maybe this is
actually an opportunity.
What do you mean?
The podcast pivot.
A-And didn't Voit
just hand you one
on a silver platter?
Yeah. Yeah.
Uh. an episode where
I find out the serial killer
is just a serial killer.
Oh. that's good.
You are brilliant.
(scoffs): Okay.
Thank you.
I guess.
Hearing that from you means...
something.
(knocking)
So... What. um.
you decided
to kill him after all?
I did not.
But our Elias Voit
podcast problem
has come to an end.
(snoring)
Nobody on Nguyen's patient list
comes close to the profile.
But he did take a lot
of walk-ins who paid with cash
because they didn't
have insurance.
That's just like
the ARC program. right?
I mean. this unsub is flying
just under the radar
when it comes to victimology.
MILLIKEN: Is there something about
his headaches that we missed?
Some other condition
that he might have?
Luke?
Hmm?
You got that "thinking
but not saying it" look.
No. Uh...
All right. what about this?
What about...
...chronic traumatic
encephalopathy?
CTE.
Yeah. we are treating that
more and more.
Especially as we understand
what concussions
are doing to the brain.
CTE has been known
to lead to violence.
I mean. not always.
- but yeah. sometimes.
- GREEN: And worst of all.
it's like having a time bomb
in your head.
Don't know you have it.
you can't even
diagnose it until an autopsy.
Do you think about that a lot?
I mean. when you serve.
you're always thinking about
where the next hit's
coming from.
- Yeah.
- Our guy probably thought about it.
And no matter where he goes.
he can't seem
to get anybody to give him
a straight answer
on why he's so angry
all the time.
And each time he gets angry.
he loses more and more control.
(voice fading): I mean. take
Nguyen. He shoved the ice pick
so far up into the brain tissue.
it made contact with the tip
of his skull. He's not trying...
DOCTOR: I'm sorry. but I need to know
how you want to proceed.
(exhales)
Okay.
Okay...
I need to see her.
Uh. b-before we do anything.
Where... Is she...
- is she awake?
- She's sleeping.
But I can wake her up for you.
Is this my fault?
- Is what your fault?
- If I would've brought her in
sooner. maybe we'd have
found the tumor earlier.
No.
That's not how this works.
No. No.
- What?
- ALVEZ: CTE.
That's not how it works.
It's not how this unsub works.
How do you know that?
The violence
associated with CTE.
you know. or cluster headaches
for that matter.
it happens in bursts.
It's disorganized. impulsive.
Yeah. but this unsub
is stalking his victims.
He's kidnapping them.
Right. and then subjecting them
to sadistic torture.
That's highly organized.
So. you're saying that
he's not in pain at all?
No. he is.
The victimology tells us that.
Then what has the same symptoms?
Matches cluster headaches or CTE
but is neither?
A tumor.
Like the Texas tower
shooter. um...
- Charles Whitman.
- Yes.
He had a tumor
pressing down on his amygdala.
That's right. That's right.
Before he started shooting.
he stabbed his wife and mother
to death.
And in his suicide note.
he wrote
that he knew there was
something wrong inside his head.
MILLIKEN:
So. this soldier came to us
for treatment. thinking
he had a headache. but...
But he had something worse.
Much worse.
What the fuck?
Hello. Doc.
Hey. Our unsub
is Sergeant David Graham.
Traffic cameras pinged him
along with a passenger
we've ID'd
as neurologist Dr. Mark Trank.
All right. we have to assume
that's our next victim.
- Anything else?
- MILLIKEN: Yeah. Graham bounced
from ARC to the VA.
A CAT scan revealed
a glioblastoma cluster
- in his prefrontal cortex.
- Operable?
Yeah. but risky. as in.
"it might get
lobotomized" risky.
VA doc that I talked to
said that Graham
refused to accept the diagnosis.
- All right. Thanks.
- (elevator bell chimes)
Alvez.
We've lost too many men already.
Copy?
Copy.
(grunts softly)
Where the fuck am I?
David.
You remember me.
I didn't think you would.
But I remember you.
You know what I remember?
"I can fix you."
That's what you said.
"I can fix you. David."
But you can't. can you?
I said that I can try
to fix you.
No. you said. "I can fix you."
You lied.
David.
Your tumor is located
inside the folds of your brain.
I-I would never lie to you.
Not if I have integrity
as a doctor.
Integrity?
You want
to talk about integrity?
Let's go. Breach silently.
Follow our lead
once we're inside. Let's go.
How well do you know your Bible?
- (grunting)
- GRAHAM: Let me tell you
what I've learned
about integrity.
(softly):
Go. go. go.
The men who trained me...
you know what they drilled
into me. huh?
"Sergeant Graham.
what is the NCO Creed. soldier?"
"Sir. to never compromise
my integrity
or my moral courage. sir."
"Soldier. what is integrity?"
"Sir. integrity means
you will do and say nothing
that deceives others. sir."
You have no integrity.
"I can fix you."
That's what you fucking said.
Now it's my turn to fix you.
"You need not fear
the terror of the night.
"Or the arrow that flies by day.
Though thousands fall about you.
near you it shall not touch."
Know that one. David?
My squads used to pray that
when we'd go out on patrol.
Psalm 91.
That's right.
Soldier's Prayer.
You serve?
Yeah. I did.
And so did my partner here.
You know. I've been
praying Psalm 91 a lot.
Hasn't done much good.
I know.
I know how you feel.
When I got back
from my last tour...
...I was losing my shit
all the time.
At one point.
I even had my gun in my mouth.
I know what that metal
feels like against your teeth.
I'm guessing you do. too.
Yeah. I do.
But I realized it wouldn't
make me feel any better.
But this?
- This does.
- I know.
I know.
So how come you're where you are
and I'm where I am?
I went to a ARC.
I asked for help.
I tried that.
I know.
So what makes you so lucky. huh?
What'd they do for you?
They paired me up.
Yeah? With who?
Someone I just lost.
Hey.
(whimpers softly)
Let me ask you something.
Does that even
make a difference?
You having a buddy?
Yeah.
Yeah. she made a difference.
She made a...
made a big difference.
What the fuck now. huh?
You gonna be my buddy?
You gonna come visit me
in prison after all this?
After all this?
What are we gonna do. buddy?
Trade war stories in the yard?
Hey. if that's
what you want. I will.
- (whimpers)
- I will.
I just don't want
to hurt anymore.
I know.
But I can't let you hurt
anyone else. either. okay?
Okay...
Just put down the ice pick.
I don't want to see
anyone else die this week.
Okay?
Please.
Put it down.
Okay?
(ice pick clatters)
Hey.
It's clear.
I'm not bullshitting you.
You want to talk to another
soldier. I'll be there for you.
I mean that.
What was her name?
The one they paired you up with.
Roxy.
Her name was Roxy.
Just hang on. all right?
- Let me get you out right now.
- TRANK: Okay.
- (whines)
- There's my girl.
You remember
the first day we met?
Hmm?
They told me. they said...
they said. "Be careful.
She's a handful."
And I said. "Good.
'Cause I am. too."
(whimpers softly)
You saved my life.
(crying softly)
(door opens)
(Roxy whimpering softly)
♪ ♪
GARCIA: "Because he holds fast
to me in love.
"I will deliver him.
I will protect him
because he knows my name."
Psalm 91.
ROSSI:
I liked your little show.
For the podcast.
Performative violence.
Nice touch.
Yeah. sometimes you got to
give the people what they want.
Scare 'em and just pull
the carpet out from under them.
Sure. You're not a monster.
You're pathetic.
Which means you don't
have to tell anyone
what you really did
to Deena Ryan.
(choking)
VOIT:
Stop.
Oh. look at that.
You can shut me up.
Maybe you're not as pathetic
as you let on.
- Yeah. maybe.
- Maybe.
But then. what was the point
of defanging yourself?
Was that for the. um.
listening audience
or the BAU?
(clanging in distance)
Wait a minute.
Is that what this is all about?
I don't know
what you're talking about.
You're analyzing this cell.
Every guard. every door.
every vulnerability.
That's not true.
I pled guilty.
I'm gonna pay for what I did.
Hey.
You can lie
to your conscious self.
but you can't lie to me.
You're planning on your chance
to escape.
GARRITY:
So. we give Elias Voit
the last word.
He wanted us to know
how he feels.
We owe him our attention.
if not our approval.
For the last time.
this is Brian Garrity.
Thank you for listening
to The Sicarius Files.
VOIT:
There's...
nothing romantic about me.
I'm not brilliant.
I'm not special.
I'm an antisocial psychopath
who can only get his heart rate
up by killing people.
It's sad how pathetic I am.
but you know
who's even more pathetic?
Someone who makes
a show about it.
And anyone who listens to it.